Chapter 5
 Prospects and Evolutions of Electric-Powered Vehicles:gas What Technologies < & by 2015? 1
 5.1. Mobility
 Transport activity is characterized both by its extreme diversity and its intersection with all other spheres of economic and social life, on all scales of the territory.
 In a century, technological evolutions have made phenomenally great strides in mobility, which has largely contributed to reorganizing our societies. It has supported economic, social and cultural development.
 The main tendencies of this mobility are the following.
 The era of megalopolises
 By supporting the movement of goods and people, mobility has contributed to the creation of major urban centers. In 2005, half of the world’s population will live in urban areas,compared to 30% in 1950. The phenomenon is particularly strong in developing countries. In 2000, 15 of the 19 megalopolises were in developing countries. In 2015, 18 of the 23 megalopolises will be located there.
 Sustainable mobility
 We speak about this more and more; it is the merging of mobility and sustainable development, or how to support an equitable mobility for the greatest number, limiting its environmental effects at an acceptable cost. It is by necessity a complex and long-term approach, requiring thinking as to the complementary action of modes of transport and the answers to the real needs of the population.
 Further, but not much further
 Because of the increase in modern societies’ urbanization, the distances covered increase each day. However, they have progressed more quickly than the time devoted to transport, proof that, contrary to generally accepted ideas, traffic conditions are improving. The time-savings achieved by the improvement to mobility are invested in distance.
 Advantage with cars
 All the studies show that the car is by far the preferred means of transport for Europeans. This unanimity is confirmed by a recent study by "Thalys international", in which 64% of Europeans judge the car practical and 42% appreciate its driving comfort. It is fairly understandable, considering that a private car makes it possible to go where we want when we want, carrying out complex journeys, at several stages, which no collective transport makes it possible to do.
 Collateral effects
 In recent decades, the rise in mobility was accompanied by a certain number of collateral effects, like polluting emissions and noise. The reaction of manufacturers made it possible to strongly reduce them. Recent vehicles, for example, pollute a hundred times’ less than vehicles fifteen years ago and are approximately half as noisy on the outside. And contrary to a widely held idea, road traffic is improving, in particular for journey times, at least in developed countries. There remains the question of CO2: European and Asian manufacturers have committed to reducing their cars’ specific emissions by the end of the decade. In Europe, the projects in progress will lead to a reduction of the CO2 emissions of road transport as of 2012 (CO2 regulation = 130g CO2).
 New horizons of automotive mobility
 New needs as regards mobility are pushing manufacturers to promote new practices with regard to the car.
 Innovating services with a better integration of the private car in the public transport network is one example of that.
 20 years ago, the use of the car was reserved for a few essential journeys: work, weekend, and holidays. However, with the evolution of lifestyles, the development of part time, the reduction of working time or the advent of a more active senior generation, reasons for traveling have multiplied, and needs have changed.
 More individualistic consumers want to keep control of their travel as much as possible, and maximize the value of the time spent in transport. Queuing up at a counter or remaining stuck in traffic is becoming increasingly less tolerated. Everyone wants to move "without obstacles" or waste of time.
 Public transport has tried to adapt to this evolution by introducing new services into their scope: information on journey times and delays, automated reservation machines, convenience stores in stations or subway stations, left luggage services, etc. The car has also adapted to this need for intelligent mobility. Navigation systems have been conceived to facilitate journeys and to make them more effective.
 But the phenomenon should quickly develop and give rise to new ways of consuming the car. The car has a considerable potential for adaptability and diversification; we simply need to regard it not simply as an object but as a pallet of solutions. The traditional "car as a product", that we buy and that we possess can very well double as a "car as a service" which we borrow and consume.
 The concept of a self-service automotive system is one of the answers to the problem of mobility.
 

  By proposing the self-service use of the electric car, Liselec widens the range of urban mobility possibilities. Complementary to other modes of displacement, it offers its subscribed customers a service which merges the flexibility of private car use and the advantage of public transport. Liselec is made up: of a completely silent vehicle that does not produce any urban pollution, and of stations (car-park areas) and recharging points spread throughout the city. This service has been in operation since 1999 in the city of La Rochelle.
 A service such as Liselec is a first stage necessary to arrive at the concept of an urban vehicle which answers the needs of users and the difficulties of city traffic jams. Everyone wishes for transport available 24-hours-a-day which enables them to travel from door-to-door, which neither buses or subways offer. But if each individual takes their vehicle to go into the town center, we run up against the number one problem of all big cities: the congestion due to the lack of traffic space resources and parking areas. The solution thus lies in a self-service system of shared vehicles. Liselec and Praxitèle made it possible to test this principle (experiment at St-Quentin-en-Yvelines, using self-service electric Renault Clio vehicles). It is necessary to be able to constantly ensure availability in any place. The handicap of self-service lies in the stations: users must go to them to pick up and return their vehicle, and they are not necessarily close to their starting point or destination. Then it is necessary to rebalance the fleet from one station to another.
 The stages which remain to be overcome are not technological. If we want to circulate non-polluting vehicles in an urban site, it will be necessary to limit the access of conventional cars, which affects the fundamental freedoms of our civilizations. Lastly, certain customers remain very much attached to the pleasure of driving. But where is the pleasure in driving bumper-to-bumper every morning to go to work?
 In certain European countries, like Switzerland, Germany or Holland, an alternative solution to conventional automotive services has thus developed over the last ten years: car-sharing. The principle: a group of individuals come together in a company or a co-operative to buy vehicles, which it then places at the disposal of its members for their travel, with favorable economic conditions due to the sharing of the fixed costs. The main advantage of the system: the removal of the constraint and associated with owning a vehicle. The flexibility of car-sharing makes it possible to borrow a vehicle for one hour, which traditional renting does not permit. We can speak about individual means of public transport. This car approach is extremely complementary to public transport.
 The advantage of the car, it is that it makes it possible to manage small flows, to meet needs for interstitial or diffuse mobility. If the inter-modality exists between the collective modes (to pass from the train to the bus), it now remains to create a inter-modality of the car, while making it possible to the users to pass from their personal car to a hiring for the weekend or to car-sharing in order to move during the evening or to make their shopping trips.
 5.2. New technologies
 As it is generally the case, it is not an evolution or an industrial innovation which makes it possible to take a big important step in the changes of the technologies implemented, but rather a coupling and a mixing of several tendencies which will build the future trend.
 Thus, to pass from the thermal car to the electrified car, several major tendencies all impacting in the same direction will allow convergence towards a credible scenario:
 – the constant evolution of the electrification of functions (thanks, amongst others, to the evolution of the components) will in the long term involve switching from the 12V to the 42V network, making it possible to provide an electric output of about 5 kW and the implementation of alterno-starter concepts;
 – the taking into account of CAFE 2012 (CO2 regulation) objectives involves a global concern for the optimal use of energy;
 – the increasing introduction of multiplexing will introduce more and more electronics into distribution and commutation functions.
 The first consequence: the electromagnetic relay will be replaced by static switches (because the cost of silicon at constant commutated is lower than the relay in 42V), which will allow the introduction of additional functions such as diagnosis, load unbalancing and degraded modes, at reduced cost.
 The development and the use of these 42V power components will make it possible to standardize the power electronics that ensure its introduction into other systems. Power electronics will finally answer automotive constraints; its generalization with electric drive systems will be facilitated.
 The ultimate target will be the "electrified vehicle", i.e. using a thermal engine, assisted by an electrical motor. The power network will be 42V implementing solenoid valves, electric steering, electric air-conditioning, etc., using, of course, batteries of new technologies.
 The domino effect can continue and allow the possibility of designing electric vehicles using electric parts coming from the major flow and presenting a balance between service and cost.
 The electrification of vehicles is underway and will develop in years to come. But switching to 42V introduces more economic than technical problems. It is thus natural, initially, to optimize today’s systems by managing electrical energy as well as possible (unbalancing, proportional control of the actuators recovery of energy). This makes it possible to push back the time limit to after 2010.
 Even when even the functions are used as advised, the electric output of the power networks will increase because certain large-scale loads will become necessary (electric steering, solenoid valves, temperature setting of catalyst system, etc.). This electrification will only complicate the problems, already serious today, of EMC (Electromagnetic Compatibility).
 5.2.1. Electric motors
 The major principles of electric motors (synchronous, asynchronous, DC current, switch reluctance, etc.) have been mastered and do not evolve. The innovations relate to basic interconnections, new designs and improvements in materials.
 There is no such thing as a good or bad electric machine, but motors adapted to each application.
 Thus, the DC-current motor, which does not have a great power density, suffers from a certain fragility and an additional cost due to its collector and it is still used for the small actuators (windshield wiper, ventilation, seat and door controls, etc.) because it is very well adapted to the low-voltage automotive electrical network (DC 12V). It does not require electronics for its control and its supremacy will only be called into question with the introduction of the 42V and the need for fine control.
 For power applications like traction, the tendency is to use alternating-current motors. Among this family, the synchronous magnet motor seems to be favored. The concerns raised about the availability and cost of permanent magnets did not prevent the virtually exclusive presence of synchronous magnet motors on all the hybrid vehicles presented recently. Its very good power density explains why it is selected in hybrid vehicles when the problems of integration are significant.
 The basic interconnections of motors can give interesting results.
 The magnetic materials and the insulating materials have to work either in a hot environment or in a moderate environment but with power densities such that the iron losses of the components would raise their temperature up to 200°C. The constraints imposed by the rise in power per unit of volume led to the development of materials likely to work at more than 200°C.
 The design (internal geometry) defines the electric motor’s performance. The number of possibilities is virtually infinite. To meet a need, suppliers are satisfied with breaking down an existing geometry, performing homotheties, for example. Even if the solution obtained works well and meets the need, this conceals the existence of a more optimal design in terms of efficiency, volume and mass.
 With the need for electric motors being very varied in the automotive field, each motor technology will be able to find its scope of application there. Efficiency and compactness will remain the major advantages of synchronous magnet machines. Asynchronous and switch-reluctance motors have the significant advantage of a no-auxiliary supply (thus without losses) even if they are not mechanically driven by the other systems of the vehicle. The "solid cast" rotors of the switch-reluctance motor allow them easier access to high speeds.
 5.2.2. Electronic power systems
 The reduction of the size and the weight of energy transformation devices has become a major issue for power electronics. The tendency to work at increasingly higher temperatures seems to be confirmed. The structures of the components move very little. The appearance of the IGBT (Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor) in 1981 was a major advance. The IGBT is power component integrating a MOS and a bipolar transistor into the same structure. Their association makes it possible to combine the advantages of these two elements while minimizing their disadvantages as much as possible. Since its creation, the enormous technological advances that have occurred have enabled the IGBT to acquire very good reliability. It is a component which is thus used in numerous, varied applications. The IGBT has become, in less than ten years, a recognized component. With the MOSFET reserved more for low voltage, they will share the car applications.
 In power electronics, we would be right to think that for a certain number of applications, other materials like silicon can be used, and particularly large-gap materials such as SiC (silicon carbon), diamond, etc.
 These materials find their justification only when we can push the ultimate limits: voltage, temperature, frequency. Studies concerning an environment which is specific for them, and which allows them an optimal operation must thus be developed.
 The current interest for ceramic materials is mainly associated with the possibilities of obtaining often remarkable electric properties (high permittivities, correct field of rupture, good thermal conductivity, etc.), on the one hand, and in addition with the possibility of using them in frequency or temperature ranges from which polymers are generally excluded.
 Contrary to the structures (IGBT, MOSFET, Thyristor, GTO, MCT), the packaging of the component is evolving. Cars represent an interesting market for component manufacturers, if the production volumes are sufficient. Some manufacturers have already proposed dedicated components. Thermics is more important for power electronics, and packaging is moving in this direction, taking into account reliability.
 5.2.3. Electric energy sources
 Electrochemical storage systems
 First of all, an important point to highlight is that in the field of electrochemistry, the evolutions are always slow because of complexity of the chemical systems implemented.
 To guarantee the success of a technology in car applications, it is essential that they answer the three criteria: cost, safety and performance.
 Various technologies which will be present in 2020:
 – lead acid (conventional (open) and sealed);
 – Ni-MH;
 – lithium (liquid electrolyte Li-ion, Li-ion lamitate, lithium polymer gel electrolyte, Lithium polymer solid electrolyte).
 Lithium: main candidate for applications: Mild Hybrid, Full Hybrid and EV if it confirms its potential for cost reduction.
 Lithium ion: it should be broken down into various technologies:
 The liquid electrolyte Li-ion: operating life and performance are now validated. The problems involving safety are on the way to being solved;
 The Li-ion polymer laminate, from companies specialized in portable applications and which are now taking an interest in the transport market.
 The solid electrolyte Li-polymer is today still at the study stage. The research projections on the polymer membrane will make it possible to have batteries working at room temperature. Today the operating temperature of these systems is 80°C. It will be necessary to have a heating system for low temperatures. The process, connected to the plastic films industry, should lead to a reduction in the cost of the cells. The cost of the packaging and thermal management will be higher than for the Li-ion, however.
 In addition to the effects of volumes and the arrival of Asian players on the market, reductions are expected in the cost of materials. Great hopes are placed in the cathode containing iron phosphate (in place of oxides Ni, Co or Mn).
 Ni-MH: as in mobile applications, it will see its market shares eaten away at by Lithium.
 Lead acid: owing to its low costs, lead acid is likely to remain the only candidate economically viable for implementations of 42 V starting and power Net, 42 V with stop/start function, 42 V for soft hybrid.
 Let us recall that there exist two types of battery technology and two types of design element:
 – tight and open technology: tight batteries have a greater capacity to cycle compared to conventional batteries (open lead). In addition, tight batteries have the advantage of being able to be placed inside the cabin without the risk of an acid leak or gaseous emission;
 – flat and orbital (spiral) electrode design: electrodes of spiral design offer better power than that of the conventional prismatic design.
 Consequently, it is the fact that they must present cycled capacities to fulfill the functions of hybridization (stop-and-start hybrid application) which will impose the passage to the tight method. Indeed, we can very well imagine 42V open lead-acid batteries to provide a Power Net function without hybridization.
 The switch from tight technology to the spiral design will make it possible to obtain more powerful batteries to fulfill the functions of hybridization for traffic congestion hybrid applications.
 Consequently, by 2020 the following will coexist:
 – the conventional lead-acid which will undoubtedly be present for stop-and-start applications and 12V- and 42V-power network systems, orbital tight lead-acid for 42V applications with stop-and-start and stop-and-go (mild hybrid).
 5.3. New cars
 On the path leading to hybrids, there is no time to lose
 The democratization of hybrids is announced in the next ten years. Associating electrical energy and thermal energy, hybrid vehicles are being studied by all the major manufacturers and are already on the road for some of them. The objective: to push the reduction in consumption and polluting emissions even further.
 In over a century, the thermal engine has widely demonstrated its effectiveness. But it is reaching a plateau today, in terms of consumption and polluting emissions, which it will become increasingly difficult to improve upon. As for the electrical drive train, which is perfect for the environment (the electricity production system aside), it remains handicapped by a limited range and a high cost. Consequently, why not associate both to add together their strong points, and reduce their weak points? It is the principle of hybrids, vehicles which use these two energy sources. They are widely talked about, even if the worldwide automotive market still counts few of them: the Toyota Prius, Estima and Crown and the Honda Insight and Civic and Citroën C3 stop and start. There are, at the beginning, two major ways of approaching this coupling.
 The first, nearest to current cars, consists of adding an electric system to a conventional power unit (motor, electronics, battery of variable power). We then speak of parallel hybrids.
 The second is to make use of a thermal engine as a generator to supply an electrical motor able to drive the wheels. This is the world of series hybrids.
 The world of series hybrids
 Mechanical energy transformation into electrical energy requires large electric motors and involves output losses throughout the drive train. The assessment of the "series" was relatively poor, until engineers had the idea of taking part of the mechanical power to transmit it directly to the wheels. We then speak of hybrids with power spilt, a recent branch, to which the Prius belongs. Thanks to this clever trick, it becomes possible to halve size of the electric motor compared to a conventional "series", with identical services. Nevertheless, in spite of this promising evolution, the "series" continues to suffer from another handicap: the transfer of mechanical energy into electrical energy is done in the range of the "full hybrids". Yet, on this level, we are at "high" voltage, which requires, at the same time, protections (for the protected electrical network), non-standard components and extremely expensive batteries, not easily compatible with the cost constraints of cars.
 Parallel hybrid, the most realistic method
 The parallel hybrid seems, in the medium-term, to be the most realistic method and most practicable in Europe. The gains hoped for with a "parallel" vary according to the level of voltage and power which the manufacturer chooses to establish on the vehicle. Logically, the higher this level, the more the possibilities are numerous, but the costs soon add up. By preserving the voltage of current vehicles, that is to say 14 volts, and by establishing an alterno-starter with a power of 2 kW, we can make a "stop &amp; start", i.e. cut the thermal engine during shutdown and start it again quickly, in order to stop consumption during non-productive phases, an opportunity that is of particular interest for town driving. The Citroën C3 stop &amp; start is the first commercialized car equipped with the stop &amp; start system. Maximum estimated gain: around 10% of consumption in a dense urban cycle. By making the voltage climb to 42 volts and the power in a range from 5 to 15 kW, we reach the world of the mild hybrid, which makes it possible to go further by assisting the thermal engine in the more penalizing consumption phases (with low torque, in traffic jump, for example). In addition to the stop &amp; start, the vehicle opens the way to the "brake &amp; boost", where the electric system comes to help the thermal engine during acceleration and recover braking energy to supply the batteries during deceleration phases. If the power is carried at around 10 to 15 kW, it becomes possible to move on to an electric drive: the vehicle is able to run in all-electric mode in the starting phases or during low-load driving, without using expensive batteries known as "of energy", necessary to the full hybrid. Ultimately we obtain greater driving comfort, more torque at low speed without a response time and a potential gain in consumption of 15 to 20%. By increasing the voltage (150 to 500 volts) and the powers (50 to 100 kW) more extensively, we then enter into the world of the full hybrid, which, in the longer term, could cover all that we can imagine of a hybrid vehicle: pure electric drive or simple electric assistance of the thermal engine, recovery of energy during braking, stop &amp; start. In addition to the fuel savings achieved on the kilometers travelled electrically, such a system could lead to gains in consumption of about 30 to 40% in hybrid mode, compared to a thermal vehicle.
 Nevertheless, the cost/service balance for the full hybrid seems difficult to obtain on the European markets. The industrial stage of the "mild hybrid" is possible only with fields of convergence with the conventional vehicle (engine, gearbox, 42V network), in order to reduce the specific costs.
 The first field of convergence: "downsizing", a basic tendency which consists of obtaining with a small engine the performance of an engine of higher cubic capacity, by exploiting all the registers of optimization — high-pressure injection, common rail, turbocharger, etc. The disadvantage is that these small engines are subjected to strong stresses at low speed. The idea is to help them in these operating ranges with an electric motor, to gain in drivability and to reduce fuel consumption by 10%.
 The second field of convergence: the expected switch of the power network of all new vehicles from 14 to 42 volts, which will support hybridization. "However, the industrialization of a mild hybrid is possible only if the additional cost at purchase can be compensated by a gain in consumption and, as much as possible, an improvement of the drivability". But, several barriers (electric motors, battery and power electronics) still remain to be removed on hybrid devices. Technological barriers
 The first technological barrier is the electrotechnical components: they need to gain in compactness (integration), efficiency (consumption) and cost. The second barrier is the batteries; lead-acid technology will need to give way to that of super caps or lithium-ions, more compact and lighter batteries with equal power, but also more expensive. Yet for all this, removing these two barriers is not enough.
 The key to hybrid success is the optimal sizing of all of the parts and good management of the energy: a leader (an electronic supervisor) is essential to determine the optimal operating mode between thermal engine, electric motor and auxiliaries. It is necessary in order to limit the costs and avoid the pitfalls of oversizing.
 Lastly, manufacturers will have to find external partners to develop and produce in series the electric motors, their control electronics and batteries.
 On the way to a fuel-cell vehicle, it is time to accelerate slowly
 Fuel-cell vehicles are announced for the second half of the millennium, when oil will be rare and when fuel-cells will have achieved their cost and reliability objectives.
 PEMFC technology
 The operating temperatures of the membranes should increase to be around 120°C. The operating life for stationary applications would be satisfactory and the same for drive applications.
 The bipolar plates are likely to evolve towards metallic solutions which allow a reduction in overall dimension. Their operating life should strongly progress.
 Concerning the stack, the main hard point will remain its cost which is likely to remain beyond the automotive objectives for a drive-train. This is mainly related to the material cost. Its operation on a broad temperature range should be controlled.
 Other fuel-cell technologies.
 SOFC technology is likely to develop for APU applications with thermal engines in order to satisfy future electricity consumption. It is not likely to experience a drive-train application.
 DMFC (Direct Methanol) technology is likely to develop for mobile applications (telephone but especially computer). It is not likely to be retained for vehicles, but it remains a method to be monitored. Indeed, in spite of a lesser performance, it makes it possible to use a liquid fuel without a reformer.
 Alkaline fuel-cell technology will still be at the R&amp;D stage.
 Reformer system
 Manufacturers are giving up on methanol.
 The technology of the gasoline reformer presents a certain number of hard points which are likely to remain crippling for an automotive application, like the thermal management of the various stages of the reformer and the complete system’s overall dimensions, and last but not least, start-up times.
 In addition, the cost of such systems is likely to remain high.
 Storage of hydrogen
 Compressed storage at 700 bars is likely to be the most widespread technology for automotive application. An international regulation will exist. The cost of this type of tank could remain a difficult point. Moreover, this technology is dependant on the accident risk inherent to gas storage.
 The cryogenic storage method is not likely to be developed for cars but could be continued for fleets of buses.
 Methods presenting larger safety will continue to be worked on.
 The technology of solid storage in hydrides will be optimized for an automotive application but is not likely to reach the industrialization stage. With regard to safety, while the on-board hydrogen pressure is less, this technology does not completely answer safety concerns because there always remains residual hydrogen at 10 or 30 bars in the tank.
 The potential for storage in nanostructures of the nanotube type will be completely evaluated.
 Chemical storage technology should be viable and implementable in a car.
 It would be a good alternative in the event of a security issue presented by compressed storage. On the other hand, it requires a network for the recovery and recycling of borate, which will penalize it.
 Public authorities
 The US are massively increasing their efforts in the fields of the fuel-cell and hydrogen, their main motivation being energy independence. In 2015, the US should have taken decisions and set up the actions necessary for the transition towards a hydrogen economy.
 The actions of the federal government and certain states will be decisive in the installation of a hydrogen distribution network and diversified means of production making it possible to ensure their energy independence.
 Japan is also increasing its efforts in these fields. Its level will remain close to that of the US.
 Today, Europe is lagging behind, both in terms of the budgets authorized for R &amp; D and in the progress made with programs. Between now and 2015, the EC will continue its efforts through the hydrogen platform because it considers this to be a strategic domain.
 The hydrogen network
 Ten European capitals are installing hydrogen service stations for captive fleets of buses. These stations make it possible to test various technologies of distribution (hydrogen in gas or liquid form for the moment) and provisioning (reforming, electrolysis of water, etc.).
 In the US and Japan similar experiments have already been conducted to validate hydrogen distribution technologies. They fuel trucks, buses and passenger cars.
 In 2015, taking into account the costs of fuel-cell vehicles, the problem of implementing a hydrogen distribution network for the general public remains significant. A distribution network for captive fleets will exist and will be managed by petroleum companies and energy suppliers.
 The installation of a network for the public will require strong public/private support and will remain a difficulty taking into account the fuel-cell market, which is still small.
 The market:
 In 2015, the automotive market of fuel-cell vehicles will be made up exclusively of captive fleets. In the US and Japan, these fleets will, however, reach volumes which could be significant (several thousand per year). In Europe, this market will exist but will be less developed.
 "One thing is sure: we can no longer consider the future only from the angle of fossil energy use by an internal combustion engine. It is a solution which has done great service and will continue to do so, but not in such an absolute way as during the last century. However, it would be just as illusory to think there exists an alternative miracle solution, both in terms of energy and the environment. The uses of the car and ways of being mobile are increasingly numerous. It is thus logical to think that for different uses and different places, there are different corresponding technological answers. Electric, hybrid in various forms, alternative fuels, fuel-cell vehicles:
 The future is one of diversity."
 Joseph BERETTA.      
  1 Chapter written by Joseph BERETTA.